README.md, before:

# Steering Functions for Car-Like Robots

## Overview

This package contains a C++ library that implements the following steering functions for car-like robots with limited turning radius (CC = continuous curvature, HC = hybrid curvature):

Steering Function           | Driving Direction          | Continuity       | Optimization Criterion
:---                        | :---                       | :---                       | :---
Dubins                      | forwards **or** backwards  | G<sup>1</sup> | path length (optimal)
CC-Dubins                   | forwards **or** backwards  | G<sup>2</sup> | path length (suboptimal)
Reeds-Shepp                 | forwards **and** backwards | G<sup>1</sup> | path length (optimal)
HC-Reeds-Shepp              | forwards **and** backwards | G<sup>2</sup> btw. cusps | path length (suboptimal)
CC-Reeds-Shepp              | forwards **and** backwards | G<sup>2</sup> | path length (suboptimal)

[![Steering Functions for Car-Like Robots](https://img.youtube.com/vi/YCT8ycMk6f8/0.jpg)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YCT8ycMk6f8)

The package contains a [RViz] visualization, which has been tested with [ROS] Kinetic under Ubuntu 16.04.

A video of the steering functions integrated into the general motion planner Bidirectional RRT* can be found [here](https://youtu.be/RlZZ4jnEhTM).

For contributions, please check the instructions in [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md).


## Purpose of the project

This software is a research prototype, originally developed for and published
as part of the publication [2].

The software is not ready for production use. It has neither been developed nor
tested for a specific use case. However, the license conditions of the
applicable Open Source licenses allow you to adapt the software to your needs.
Before using it in a safety relevant setting, make sure that the software
fulfills your requirements and adjust it according to any applicable safety
standards (e.g. ISO 26262).


## Publications
If you use one of the above steering functions in your work, please cite the appropriate publication:

[1] H. Banzhaf et al., **"From Footprints to Beliefprints: Motion Planning under Uncertainty for Maneuvering Automated Vehicles in Dense Scenarios,"** (to be published).

[2] H. Banzhaf et al., **"Hybrid Curvature Steer: A Novel Extend Function for Sampling-Based Nonholonomic Motion Planning in Tight Environments,"** in IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2017.

[3] L. E. Dubins, **"On Curves of Minimal Length with a Constraint on Average Curvature, and with Prescribed Initial and Terminal Positions and Tangents,"** in American Journal of Mathematics, 1957.

[4] J. Reeds and L. Shepp, **"Optimal paths for a car that goes both forwards and backwards,"** in Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 1990.

[5] T. Fraichard and A. Scheuer, **"From Reeds and Shepp's to Continuous-Curvature Paths,"** in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2004.


## License

The source code in this package is released under the Apache-2.0 License. For further details, see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

The [3rdparty-licenses.txt](3rd-party-licenses.txt) contains a list of other open source components included in this package.


## Installation & Usage

### Dependencies
This package depends on the linear algebra library [Eigen], which can be installed by

    sudo apt-get install libeigen3-dev

The [ROS] dependencies are listed in the package.xml and can be installed by

    rosdep install steering_functions


### Building

To build this package from source, clone it into your catkin workspace and compile it in *Release* mode according to

    cd catkin_ws/src
    git clone https://github.com/hbanzhaf/steering_functions.git
    catkin build steering_functions -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release

To launch a demo of the package, execute

    source catkin_ws/devel/setup.bash
    roslaunch steering_functions steering_functions.launch


### Linking

To link this library with another [ROS] package, add these lines to your package's CMakeLists.txt

    add_compile_options(-std=c++11)
    find_package(catkin REQUIRED COMPONENTS
      steering_functions
    )
    include_directories(
      ${catkin_INCLUDE_DIRS}
    )
    target_link_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME}_node
      ${catkin_LIBRARIES}
    )

and the following lines to your package's package.xml

    <build_depend>steering_functions</build_depend>
    <run_depend>steering_functions</run_depend>

Now the steering functions can be used in your package by including the appropriate header, e.g.

    #include "steering_functions/hc_cc_state_space/hc00_reeds_shepp_state_space.hpp"


### Testing

To build the unit tests, exectue

    catkin build steering_functions -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release --make-args tests

To run a single test, e.g. the timing test, execute

    cd catkin_ws/devel/lib/steering_functions
    ./timing_test


## Documentation
### Conventions
In this implementation, a path is described by *N* segments. Each segment is given by the open-loop control inputs **u**<sub>*k*</sub> = *[delta_s<sub>k</sub>, kappa<sub>k</sub>, sigma<sub>k</sub>]<sup>T</sup>*, where *k = 1...N* iterates over the *N* segments, *delta_s<sub>k</sub>* describes the signed arc length of segment *k*, *kappa<sub>k</sub>* the curvature at the beginning of segment *k*, and *sigma<sub>k</sub>* the linear change in curvature along segment *k*.

The states of the robot can be obtained with a user-specified discretization by forward integrating the open-loop controls **u**<sub>*k*</sub>. A robot state consists of **x** = *[x, y, theta, kappa, d]<sup>T</sup>*, where *x, y* describe the center of the rear axle, *theta* the orientation of the robot, *kappa* the curvature at position *x, y*, and *d* the driving direction ({-1,0,1}).

In addition to that, this package is capable of computing a Gaussian belief along the nominal path given an initial belief, the motion and measurement noise, and a feedback controller. A belief *bel*(**x**) is described by the mean *mu*, the covariance of the state estimate *Sigma*, the distribution over state estimates *Lambda*, and the total covariance *Sigma + Lambda*. Further details can be found in [1].


### Start and Goal State
All steering functions expect a start state **x**<sub>*s*</sub> = *[x<sub>s</sub>, y<sub>s</sub>, theta<sub>s</sub>, kappa<sub>s</sub>, d<sub>s</sub>]<sup>T</sup>* and a goal state **x**<sub>*g*</sub> = *[x<sub>g</sub>, y<sub>g</sub>, theta<sub>g</sub>, kappa<sub>g</sub>, d<sub>g</sub>]<sup>T</sup>* as input. Note that the initial and final driving direction are selected by the steering function according to the computed path. They can not be selected manually, therefore, leave *d<sub>s</sub>* = *d<sub>g</sub>* = 0.

Depending on the two superscripts in the name of the steering function (see Section *Computation Times* for an overview), a different curvature is applied to the start (first superscript) and goal state (second superscript). The superscript 0 denotes that zero curvature is enfored no matter which curvature is given at that state. The superscript ± indicates that either positive or negative max. curvature is selected by the steering function if the user inputs no curvature. However, if a non-zero curvature is assigned, the steering function computes that path with the corresponding signed max. curvature. This feature can be useful in sampling-based motion planners when cuvature continuity has to be ensured at the connection of two extensions.

Additionally, the steering functions CC-Dubins and HC-Reeds-Shepp compute a path that takes into account an arbitrary start and goal curvature specified by the user.


### Path Length Comparison
Since CC-Dubins, CC-Reeds-Shepp, and HC-Reeds-Shepp do not satisfy any strict optimization criterion anymore, the following two histograms compare them against their optimal counterpart (10<sup>5</sup> random steering procedures, max. curvature = 1 m<sup>-1</sup>, max. sharpness = 1 m<sup>-2</sup>.):

![Path Length Comparison](doc/images/path_length_comparison.png)


### Computation Times
The following table shows the current computation times of the implemented steering functions, which are obtained from 10<sup>5</sup> random steering procedures on a single core of an Intel Xeon E5@3.50 GHz, 10 MB cache:

Steering Function           | mean [µs] | std [µs]
:---                        | :---      | :---
Dubins                      | 1.3       | ±0.8
CC<sup>±±</sup>-Dubins      | 7.1       | ±3.1
CC<sup>±0</sup>-Dubins      | 5.6       | ±1.5
CC<sup>0±</sup>-Dubins      | 5.6       | ±1.6
CC<sup>00</sup>-Dubins      | 4.9       | ±1.5
CC-Dubins                   | 14.8      | ±4.3
---                         | ---       | ---
Reeds-Shepp                 | 7.4       | ±1.7
HC<sup>±±</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 58.1      | ±10.1
HC<sup>±0</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 56.4      | ±8.8
HC<sup>0±</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 51.0      | ±10.2
HC<sup>00</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 55.9      | ±9.5
HC-Reeds-Shepp              | 464.3     | ±72.8
CC<sup>00</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 53.8      | ±8.4


### Interfacing with OMPL
In order to use the continuous and hybrid curvature state spaces along with [OMPL], a new OMPL state space has to be created as described [here](http://ompl.kavrakilab.org/2012/03/18/geometric-planning-for-car-like-vehicles.html). OMPL requires a distance and an interpolate function, which are provided in this package.


## Bugs & Feature Requests
Please use the [Issue Tracker](https://github.com/hbanzhaf/steering_functions/issues) to report bugs or request features.

[ROS]: http://www.ros.org
[RViz]: http://wiki.ros.org/rviz
[OMPL]: http://ompl.kavrakilab.org/
[Eigen]: http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/

Commit message:

Extended the statistics by the number of curvature discontinuities in the computed path
Signed-off-by: Holger Banzhaf <holger.banzhaf@de.bosch.com>

README.md, after:

# Steering Functions for Car-Like Robots

## Overview

This package contains a C++ library that implements the following steering functions for car-like robots with limited turning radius (CC = continuous curvature, HC = hybrid curvature):

Steering Function           | Driving Direction          | Continuity       | Optimization Criterion
:---                        | :---                       | :---                       | :---
Dubins                      | forwards **or** backwards  | G<sup>1</sup> | path length (optimal)
CC-Dubins                   | forwards **or** backwards  | G<sup>2</sup> | path length (suboptimal)
Reeds-Shepp                 | forwards **and** backwards | G<sup>1</sup> | path length (optimal)
HC-Reeds-Shepp              | forwards **and** backwards | G<sup>2</sup> btw. cusps | path length (suboptimal)
CC-Reeds-Shepp              | forwards **and** backwards | G<sup>2</sup> | path length (suboptimal)

[![Steering Functions for Car-Like Robots](https://img.youtube.com/vi/YCT8ycMk6f8/0.jpg)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YCT8ycMk6f8)

The package contains a [RViz] visualization, which has been tested with [ROS] Kinetic under Ubuntu 16.04.

A video of the steering functions integrated into the general motion planner Bidirectional RRT* can be found [here](https://youtu.be/RlZZ4jnEhTM).

For contributions, please check the instructions in [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md).


## Purpose of the project

This software is a research prototype, originally developed for and published
as part of the publication [2].

The software is not ready for production use. It has neither been developed nor
tested for a specific use case. However, the license conditions of the
applicable Open Source licenses allow you to adapt the software to your needs.
Before using it in a safety relevant setting, make sure that the software
fulfills your requirements and adjust it according to any applicable safety
standards (e.g. ISO 26262).


## Publications
If you use one of the above steering functions in your work, please cite the appropriate publication:

[1] H. Banzhaf et al., **"From Footprints to Beliefprints: Motion Planning under Uncertainty for Maneuvering Automated Vehicles in Dense Scenarios,"** (to be published).

[2] H. Banzhaf et al., **"Hybrid Curvature Steer: A Novel Extend Function for Sampling-Based Nonholonomic Motion Planning in Tight Environments,"** in IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2017.

[3] L. E. Dubins, **"On Curves of Minimal Length with a Constraint on Average Curvature, and with Prescribed Initial and Terminal Positions and Tangents,"** in American Journal of Mathematics, 1957.

[4] J. Reeds and L. Shepp, **"Optimal paths for a car that goes both forwards and backwards,"** in Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 1990.

[5] T. Fraichard and A. Scheuer, **"From Reeds and Shepp's to Continuous-Curvature Paths,"** in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2004.


## License

The source code in this package is released under the Apache-2.0 License. For further details, see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file.

The [3rdparty-licenses.txt](3rd-party-licenses.txt) contains a list of other open source components included in this package.


## Installation & Usage

### Dependencies
This package depends on the linear algebra library [Eigen], which can be installed by

    sudo apt-get install libeigen3-dev

The [ROS] dependencies are listed in the package.xml and can be installed by

    rosdep install steering_functions


### Building

To build this package from source, clone it into your catkin workspace and compile it in *Release* mode according to

    cd catkin_ws/src
    git clone https://github.com/hbanzhaf/steering_functions.git
    catkin build steering_functions -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release

To launch a demo of the package, execute

    source catkin_ws/devel/setup.bash
    roslaunch steering_functions steering_functions.launch


### Linking

To link this library with another [ROS] package, add these lines to your package's CMakeLists.txt

    add_compile_options(-std=c++11)
    find_package(catkin REQUIRED COMPONENTS
      steering_functions
    )
    include_directories(
      ${catkin_INCLUDE_DIRS}
    )
    target_link_libraries(${PROJECT_NAME}_node
      ${catkin_LIBRARIES}
    )

and the following lines to your package's package.xml

    <build_depend>steering_functions</build_depend>
    <run_depend>steering_functions</run_depend>

Now the steering functions can be used in your package by including the appropriate header, e.g.

    #include "steering_functions/hc_cc_state_space/hc00_reeds_shepp_state_space.hpp"


### Testing

To build the unit tests, exectue

    catkin build steering_functions -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release --make-args tests

To run a single test, e.g. the timing test, execute

    cd catkin_ws/devel/lib/steering_functions
    ./timing_test


## Documentation
### Conventions
In this implementation, a path is described by *N* segments. Each segment is given by the open-loop control inputs **u**<sub>*k*</sub> = *[delta_s<sub>k</sub>, kappa<sub>k</sub>, sigma<sub>k</sub>]<sup>T</sup>*, where *k = 1...N* iterates over the *N* segments, *delta_s<sub>k</sub>* describes the signed arc length of segment *k*, *kappa<sub>k</sub>* the curvature at the beginning of segment *k*, and *sigma<sub>k</sub>* the linear change in curvature along segment *k*.

The states of the robot can be obtained with a user-specified discretization by forward integrating the open-loop controls **u**<sub>*k*</sub>. A robot state consists of **x** = *[x, y, theta, kappa, d]<sup>T</sup>*, where *x, y* describe the center of the rear axle, *theta* the orientation of the robot, *kappa* the curvature at position *x, y*, and *d* the driving direction ({-1,0,1}).

In addition to that, this package is capable of computing a Gaussian belief along the nominal path given an initial belief, the motion and measurement noise, and a feedback controller. A belief *bel*(**x**) is described by the mean *mu*, the covariance of the state estimate *Sigma*, the distribution over state estimates *Lambda*, and the total covariance *Sigma + Lambda*. Further details can be found in [1].


### Start and Goal State
All steering functions expect a start state **x**<sub>*s*</sub> = *[x<sub>s</sub>, y<sub>s</sub>, theta<sub>s</sub>, kappa<sub>s</sub>, d<sub>s</sub>]<sup>T</sup>* and a goal state **x**<sub>*g*</sub> = *[x<sub>g</sub>, y<sub>g</sub>, theta<sub>g</sub>, kappa<sub>g</sub>, d<sub>g</sub>]<sup>T</sup>* as input. Note that the initial and final driving direction are selected by the steering function according to the computed path. They can not be selected manually, therefore, leave *d<sub>s</sub>* = *d<sub>g</sub>* = 0.

Depending on the two superscripts in the name of the steering function (see Section *Computation Times* for an overview), a different curvature is applied to the start (first superscript) and goal state (second superscript). The superscript 0 denotes that zero curvature is enfored no matter which curvature is given at that state. The superscript ± indicates that either positive or negative max. curvature is selected by the steering function if the user inputs no curvature. However, if a non-zero curvature is assigned, the steering function computes that path with the corresponding signed max. curvature. This feature can be useful in sampling-based motion planners when cuvature continuity has to be ensured at the connection of two extensions.

Additionally, the steering functions CC-Dubins and HC-Reeds-Shepp compute a path that takes into account an arbitrary start and goal curvature specified by the user.


### Statistics
A benchmark of the G<sup>2</sup> continuous steering functions against their G<sup>1</sup> continuous counterpart is illustrated in the following histograms (10<sup>5</sup> random steering procedures, max. curvature = 1 m<sup>-1</sup>, max. sharpness = 1 m<sup>-2</sup>.). The first row shows a comparison of the path length, and the second row compares the number of curvature discontinuities in the computed path:

![Statistics](doc/images/statistics.png)


### Computation Times
The following table shows the current computation times of the implemented steering functions, which are obtained from 10<sup>5</sup> random steering procedures on a single core of an Intel Xeon E5@3.50 GHz, 10 MB cache:

Steering Function           | mean [µs] | std [µs]
:---                        | :---      | :---
Dubins                      | 1.3       | ±0.8
CC<sup>±±</sup>-Dubins      | 7.1       | ±3.1
CC<sup>±0</sup>-Dubins      | 5.6       | ±1.5
CC<sup>0±</sup>-Dubins      | 5.6       | ±1.6
CC<sup>00</sup>-Dubins      | 4.9       | ±1.5
CC-Dubins                   | 14.8      | ±4.3
---                         | ---       | ---
Reeds-Shepp                 | 7.4       | ±1.7
HC<sup>±±</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 58.1      | ±10.1
HC<sup>±0</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 56.4      | ±8.8
HC<sup>0±</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 51.0      | ±10.2
HC<sup>00</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 55.9      | ±9.5
HC-Reeds-Shepp              | 464.3     | ±72.8
CC<sup>00</sup>-Reeds-Shepp | 53.8      | ±8.4


### Interfacing with OMPL
In order to use the continuous and hybrid curvature state spaces along with [OMPL], a new OMPL state space has to be created as described [here](http://ompl.kavrakilab.org/2012/03/18/geometric-planning-for-car-like-vehicles.html). OMPL requires a distance and an interpolate function, which are provided in this package.


## Bugs & Feature Requests
Please use the [Issue Tracker](https://github.com/hbanzhaf/steering_functions/issues) to report bugs or request features.

[ROS]: http://www.ros.org
[RViz]: http://wiki.ros.org/rviz
[OMPL]: http://ompl.kavrakilab.org/
[Eigen]: http://eigen.tuxfamily.org/
